Cornplanter interview with Fenton and Kurath, 1948-08-26

WF: Let's talk about the Corn Dance a moment, Jesse. Where did these songs you sang originate? Where did they come from?

JC: According to my memory, from what I heard, it has always been used amongst us Seneca longhouses, ages, ages back, handed down from one singer to another. And the way I sing is just the way I was taught.

WF: Who taught you to sing these songs?

JC: My father was a great singer of all those social and other ceremonial dances. And then he taught me all those songs.

WF: So your father was Edward Cornplanter, the one they call Sosyendo:wah?

JC: Yes he was.

WF: There were two songs that you told me while we were playing it back, that your father brought with him from Onondaga. Which two songs were they? If we could identify those on the record, it would make it easier.
 
JC: It was that song that goes like this: 
(sings) Wa:doyah haneyeh [cf Dowdy song 10]

That was one of 'em.

WF: And what was the other song that your father brought back from Onondaga longhouse?

JC: (sings) Weniyo weniyo:hoh [one of JC's distinct songs, see notebook]

Those are the ones.

WF: Those are the two that came from Onondaga longhouse near Syracuse, New York?

JC: Right.

WF: And now tell me: when does [sic] this Corn Dance performed? When do the people dance Corn Dance?

JC: According to the old custom, it used to be, in the time when they had the ceremonies dedicated to the Three Sisters, the  main support of our lives, what we call Johehgöh, that was the time they used to dance this dance. But now, since we lost the old customs and the ways of doing things like the old-timers did, we use them now as a social dance in all occasions.

WF: Are there no dances--Is there no time at Newtown longhouse when the Corn Dance belongs to the Three Sisters and is danced especially for them?

JC: It is now. It was introduced, just recently, and for quite a long time they used that dance instead of that Hand in Hand Dance, because this Corn Dance, according to one of the old chiefs, thought it was dedicated to the Corn, one of the sisters that composed the Three Sisters, our main support of life.

WF: See, the Three Sisters are the corn, and what else?

JC: Beans, and squash.

WF: Squash. These are the vegetables that the old Indian people planted in their gardens.

JC: Right.

WF: I think that's enough about the Corn Dance. Is there anything more you think of, Gertrude, that we ought to include?

Gertrude Kurath: Yes, I think it's an interesting point, that he said that one song, in one song the dancers don't just go in a circle but weave in and out and then wind up into a knot. Now which song was that?

WF: The Corn Dance, but where? Where in the Corn Dance do they finally...

GK: Yeah, which song was that?

JC: When they start to sing that (sings) "Wihah. Yoyowineh wihah..." [song 2] all those songs in a group. Then they all start to wind around, they come back they go round seven times in formation. 

WF: Yeah, they form into... the dance reverses itself if I remember, and the people all end up in a cluster.

JC: Some of them go that way and others going back.

WF: Clockwise and counterclockwise.

GK: You go in a sort of serpentine path?

WF: At the start. They start to weave in a serpentine fashion, and then they end up all in a group, with some of the people going in one direction, and some in another. And then finally the dance breaks up, is that [right]?

JC: Uh-huh. It depends on whether the leader follows them, or leads them.

WF: And how does the leader terminate or end the song?

JC: He just raise up his rattle and shake it two, three times. That shows that's, it's the end of it.

WF: Do you have any more to say, Gertrude?

GK: Yes. This Corn Dance, in other words, is not danced only at the Green Corn Festival in September, but it can be danced at all other occasions, is that right?

JC: Yeah, that is. Now it's used as a social dance.

WF: In other words a dance that was formerly intimately associated with celebrating thanks for the Three Sisters now has come to be part of the repertoire of the social dances that you call Gaena'shö.

JC: Yes.

GK: When did that festival of the Three Sisters used to take place?

JC: Only twice a year--three times a year. That's, the Midwinter Ceremonies; [pause] oh, the blessing of seeds, when they plant; and then  the String Beans, that is on the Tonawanda Reservation, the String Beans Dance; then comes the Green Corn Dance; then at the last dance of the year, the Harvest Dance, that's the only time they dance these, what they call The Three Sisters Dance.

WF: What are the Three Sisters Dances and how many are there?

JC: According to the Tonawanda system, there's only four: The Women's Dance, the Great Feather Dance, and then, what they call the Standing Quiver or the Stomp Dance, and then the Hand in Hand Dance. And it winds back to the original, the Women's Dance. That's the routine of the Johehgöh Ceremony.

WF: Here at Tonawanda. Then the Corn Dance that we just recorded, doesn't come in the program of dances for the Three Sisters.

JC: Not here, no.

WF: But it used to, at Newtown.

JC: It used to, at Newtown.

WF: Okay.

